
                      Study Questions on the Sacraments

Sacraments (WCF 27-29; WLC 161-177; WSC 91-97)
What is a sacrament? Explain in layman's terms. Defend with Scripture
proofs.
WSC: a sacrament is an holy ordinance wherein by sensible signs, Christ and
the benefits of the new covenant are represented seal and applied to
believers

   Note: Sacraments are witness to the thing presupposed; they do not
   produce faith or produce perfection, but confirm the promises made in the
   covenant of grace.

WSC: Baptism is a sacrament, wherein the washing with water in the name of
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, doth signify and seal our
ingrafting into Christ and our partaking of the benefits of the covenant of
grace, and our engagement to be the Lord's

WSC: The Lord's Supper is a sacrament wherein the giving and receiving of
bread and wine according to Christ's appointment, his death is shown forth
and the worthy receivers are, not after a corporeal or carnal manner, but
by faith made partakers of his body and blood with all his benefits, to
their spiritual nourishment and growth in grace.

   Calvin: "an outward sign by which the Lord seals on our consciences the
   promises of his good will toward us in order to sustain the weakness of
   our faith." "A sacrament is God's witness to us of his favor toward us,
   by means of an outward sign."

Why did God give us sacraments? WCF 27.1
   1. they are signs and seals of the covenant of grace
   2. they are instituted by God to represent Christ and his benefits
   3. to confirm our interest in him
   4. to put a visible difference between the church and the rest of the
      world
   5. to solemnly engage believers to the service of God in Christ

How many sacraments are there? Defend your answer with Scripture proofs.
There are two sacraments: baptism and the Lord's Supper, instituted by
Christ;
   1. Baptism - Matthew 28:19
   2. Lord's Supper - Matthew 26:26ff // Mark 14:22ff // Luke 22:14ff // 1
      Cor. 11:23ff

Does anything really happen in a sacrament?
Yes, by faith the sacraments are a means of grace; by the working of the
Spirit the believer is spiritually nourished, her faith is strengthened and
she receives assurance of her salvation; there is more to the sacrament
than simply a memorial; not by any power in themselves, or any virtue
derived from the piety or intention of him by whom they are administered,
but only by the working of the Holy Ghost, and the blessing of Christ, by
whom they are instituted.

What NT references show parallels between OT and NT sacraments:
   1. Genesis 17:7, 9 with Galatians 3:9
   2. Romans 4:11-12, Abraham receives the sign of circumcision as a seal of
      his righteousness by faith
   3. Galatians 3:26-29, you were baptized into Christ
   4. Colossians 2:11-12, you were circumcised with the circumcision of
      Christ, buried with him in baptism

BAPTISM
Of what is baptism a sign and seal?
Baptism is a sign and seal of:
   1. ingrafting/union with Christ, Rom 6:3ff;  Col. 2:9ff
   2. remission of sins, 1 Cor. 6:9-11
   3. regeneration/adoption/one in Christ, Gal. 3:26-29
   4. outpouring of the Holy Spirit, Titus 3:4-5

What is a sign and what is a seal?
   1. Sign - a sign displays and represents in clear symbolism the realities
      of the covenant of grace (OT/NT)
        a. Visible
        b. Tangible
   2. Seal - a seal personalizes and applies by faith to the believer the
      realities of the covenant of grace (OT/NT)
        a. Personal
        b. Applied by the Spirit through faith

Where in Scripture are these terms used?
The terms sign and seal are used in Romans 4:11-12, Abraham received the
sign of circumcision, the seal of righteousness by faith; Ephesians 1:13.

How does the latter term relate to paedo-baptism?
As the sign and seal of the Old Covenant was circumcision, the sign and
seal of the New Covenant is baptism, cf. Romans 4:11-12 and Col. 2:11-12;
cf. 1 Cor. 7:14

How is baptism rightly administered? Defend your answer with Scripture
proofs.
Baptism is rightly administered with
    < the washing of water (Acts 8:36-38; Acts 10:47), by sprinkling (Heb.
      9:10, 13, 19-21; cf. Lev 14, 16; Num 19),
    < in the name of the Trinity (Matt 28:19),
    < by a minister of the gospel (Hebrews 5:4, 1 Cor. 4:1); cf. Hodge

Four Views on Baptism
Baptism as a sign and seal - the Reformed view holds baptism is a mystery,
a means of grace; as a sacrament, instituted by Christ in Matthew 28:19
believers and their children (1 Cor, 7:14) are to be baptized. Baptism is a
sacrament to be administered once as a sign of our ingrafting into Christ,
our remission of sins, separation from the world; baptism is a sign and
seal of what God does in salvation more than anything the believer does.
The method is by sprinkling, infants are baptized.

Baptism as God's regenerative act - the Lutheran view holds to an
interpretation of 1 Peter 3:20-21 that baptism saves, gives life to those
that have been chosen according to the foreknowledge of God; baptism is an
agent of God's recreating preached Word; this view seems to go beyond
scripture in the connection between baptism and salvation, and does not
clearly enough separate baptism from saving faith in Christ's blood.  The
method is varied, infants are baptized.

Baptism as the occasion of salvation - the Church of Christ view holds that
baptism is the occasion on which, through water, God washes the believer,
cleansing the penitent sinner believer from all his or her sin; baptism is
not offered to anyone who does not hear the Word and believe since the
effective response of hearing the Word is to be baptized; according to this
view, the believer's sins are not washed away, despite having faith in
Christ for salvation, until his or her baptism. In this view, faith is not
the occasion for salvation. The method is by immersion, infants are not
baptized.

Baptism as a symbol and reminder - the Baptist/Anabaptist view is that
baptism is merely a symbol of the believers salvation; baptism is a public
declaration of the believer that he or she believes in Christ for salvation
and his or her desire for unity in the church; no saving activity happens
in baptism but is merely a declaration that once dead in transgression is
made alive in Christ, Eph 2:5. The method is by immersion, infants are not
baptized.

How does one improve his or her baptism? WLC 167: Improving our Baptism
   1. giving serious and thankful consideration for baptism
   2. being humbled by our sin and brokenness
   3. growing in our assurance of the pardon of our sins
   4. drawing strength from Christ's death and resurrection
   5. seeking to live more by faith as a result of God's work in us
   6. walking more in brotherly love as a result, unity of the body

Would you under any circumstances baptize someone by immersion? Explain.
Yes, having explained the nature of baptism to the individual, there is no
prohibition against baptism in this manner, although the preferred manner
is by sprinkling, the command is to wash with water in the triune name, not
the method used; I would consider this unusual and improper as we
understand from scripture, i.e. the washing or sprinkling imagery that is
communicated in the OT purification rituals (Hebrews 9:10, 19-22); in the
NT (1 Cor. 6:9-11).

Who is to be baptized? Defend your answer with Scripture proofs.
Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible church
until they profess their faith in Christ and obedience to him, but the
infants of such as are members of the visible church are to be baptized.
Acts 2:38-39, Genesis 17:7 with Gal. 3:9; 1 Corinthians 7:14; Luke 18:15-
16; Romans 4:11-12; all support children being welcomed into the faith and
being baptized. Household baptisms of Lydia and the Jailer (Acts 16) and
Cornelius (Acts 10), Stephanus (1 Cor. 1:16)

   Romans 4:11-12 (ESV)
   11 He received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness
   that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised. The purpose was to
   make him the father of all who believe without being circumcised, so that
   righteousness would be counted to them as well, 12 and to make him the
   father of the circumcised who are not merely circumcised but who also
   walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had before he
   was circumcised.


   Colossians 2:11-12 (ESV)
   11 In him also you were circumcised with a circumcision made without
   hands, by putting off the body of the flesh, by the circumcision of
   Christ, 12 having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also
   raised with him through faith in the powerful working of God, who raised
   him from the dead.


   Luke 18:15-16 (ESV)
   15 Now they were bringing even infants to him that he might touch them.
   And when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 16 But Jesus called
   them to him, saying, "Let the children come to me, and do not hinder
   them, for to such belongs the kingdom of God.


   1 Corinthians 7:14 (ESV)
   14 For the unbelieving husband is made holy because of his wife, and the
   unbelieving wife is made holy because of her husband. Otherwise your
   children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy.

How would you deal with a family in your church who did not want their
child baptized?
I would approach humbly trying to discern their situation and why the
hesitation, why they are bound by the issue. How do the parents understand
the covenant promises to their child? I would patiently teach them, showing
them in scripture the consistency of God's covenant promises to them and
their child, continuation of the Covenant that God made with Abraham,
seeing that baptism is a sign of God's covenant with us not of our
regeneration, cf. WCF XXVIII; BCO 6

Does baptism actually save the person baptized? Explain and defend with
proofs.
No, baptism does not save the individual, cf. 1 Peter 3:20-22; baptism is
an appeal to God for a "good conscience" of our salvation in the
resurrection of Christ Jesus, baptism remains a means of grace, a sign and
seal of our faith, rooted in the righteousness and resurrection of Jesus
Christ.


Can a person be baptized more than once? Explain and defend with Scripture
proofs.
A person should not be baptized more than once with a Christian (valid)
baptism WCF XXVIII; this breaks with the one baptism imagery in Ephesians
4:4-6;

Unless there is reason to believe that the initial baptism was not a
Christian baptism: Trinitarian (Matt 28:19), with water (Hebrews 9:10, 19-
20), by minster of the gospel (Hebrews 5:4, 1 Cor. 4:1) in a gospel-
believing church; additionally in Acts 19:1-7 there is the account of
believers who were baptized into John's baptism, Paul baptized them in the
name of Jesus Christ, their first Christian baptism.

How would you handle a request for baptism from a previously baptized
former liberal?
I would seek to understand the reasoning behind the desire. Do they not
feel they have received a Christian baptism and why, what is the nature of
their faith in Christ, or the faith of his or her parents? Unless there is
reason to believe he or she has not received a Christian baptism (the
church is not gospel-believing and/or profession of parents is not valid),
I would not re-baptize them, explaining again that it is a sign and seal of
what God has done for him in Christ, and it is the working of the Holy
Spirit that makes the sacrament effectual as a means of grace, not how we
"feel" about it; calling to mind that Augustine and Hodge kept to a view
that the work is the Spirit's regardless the one administering the
sacrament.

How would you handle a request for baptism from a previously baptized
Mormon?
I would baptize a Mormon in the name of the Trinity as they have not
previously received a Christian baptism.

LORD'S SUPPER
What is the meaning of the Lord's Supper?
   1. It is a sign and seal - showing forth Christ's death, our
      participating, our spiritual nourishment and our unity with other
      believers
   2. It is a means of grace
   3. We participate in it, 1 Corinthians 10:14-22

What "happens" in the Lord's Supper?
The worthy receivers of the Lord's Supper, by faith partake in the body and
blood of Christ and are spiritually nourished by the "real presence" of
Christ in the elements.

Distinguish Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Reformed and Zwinglian views.
   1. Roman Catholic - transubstantiation, as delineated by the Council of
      Trent, expanded by the 4th Lateran Council and further by Thomas
      Aquinas, this view states that the substance of the elements are
      changed, as in Aristotelian philosophy, the accidents (of bread and
      wine) remain, but they are changed substantively to the body and blood
      of Christ, this does not comport with Jesus instituting the ordinance
      at the last supper, cf. Matthew 26:26-29;
   2. Lutheran - consubstantiation, developed by Martin Luther and Philip
      Melanchthon this view states that Christ's presence is in, around,
      under and through the elements, but nonetheless present, cf. Acts 3:20-
      21; Luther disagreed with Zwingli at the Marburg Colloquy in 1529
      regarding the nature of baptism, the 15th of 15 points of doctrine;
   3. Reformed - real/spiritual presence, held by Calvin and other
      reformers, consistent with Westminster Standards, this view holds that
      the Lord's Supper is more than a memorial -a mystery; the "real
      presence" or "spiritual presence" of Christ is present as a means of
      grace to believers by faith through the blessing of Christ and the
      work of the Spirit in them that by faith receive them
   4. Zwinglian - memorialist view, Ulrich Zwingli states this view, it is a
      remembering device to recall what Christ had done on the cross, this
      does not agree with our participation in the sacrament as described in
      1 Corinthians 10:14-22;

Is Christ in any sense present in the Lord's Supper? If so, how?
Yes, Christ is present in the Lord' Supper, but not carnally, there is not
a change of substance, nor is Christ's physical body present in the
elements, cf. Acts 3:20-21

How should believers celebrate the Lord's Supper?
   1. as in the WSC, believers ought to discern the Lord's body, 1
      Corinthians 11:
   2. with their faith to feed upon it
   3. their repentance, love and new obedience
   4. lest coming unworthily they eat and drink judgment upon themselves

How is "fencing the table" practiced during communion?
   1. all are welcome who profess faith in Christ, a member of Christ's
      church or those that have been approved by session, it is Christ's
      meal
   2. the ignorant and scandalous are not permitted
   3. non-confessing or non-communicants are told to refrain
   4. non-communing members are encouraged to remain and to consider what is
      happening

How do the sacraments agree? How are they similar/dissimilar?

|             |Baptism                       |Lord's Supper                 |
|Similar:     |                              |                              |
|             |Author is God                                               |
|             |spiritual benefit is Christ                                 |
|             |sign and seal of same covenant, Romans 11:15-26             |
|             |by minster of the gospel (Heb. 5:4)                         |
|             |continued until second coming                               |
|Dissimilar:  |                              |                              |
|Elements     |Water                         |Bread and wine                |
|Frequency    |Once                          |Often                         |
|Sign/Seal    |ingrafting into Christ, Rom.  |sets forth Christ's death, 1  |
|             |6:3                           |Cor. 11:23ff                  |
|             |remission of sin, 1 Cor.      |our participating in his      |
|             |6:9-11                        |death, 1 Cor. 10:14-22        |
|             |adoption, Gal. 3:26-29        |spiritual nourishment, John   |
|             |outpouring of the Holy Spirit,|6:53-57                       |
|             |Ti. 3:4-5                     |unity of believers, 1 Cor.    |
|             |                              |10:17                         |
|Meaning (WLC)|Regeneration                  |Spiritual nourishment         |
|             |Ingrafting into Christ        |Growth in Christ              |

Administration of Baptism:

      Read covenant promises (Acts 2:39; Gen 17:7; Acts 16:31)


      Acknowledge child's need of cleansing blood


      Claim God's covenant promises  in  his  behalf,  looking  to  God  for
      salvation


      Dedicate child and  Parents:  in  humble  reliance,  setting  a  godly
      example, pray, teach, bring up in nurture

        a. Congregational Oath Option

      Baptism in the triune name


Administrating Lord's Supper:
   1. Explaining given by Christ
   2. Fencing the table:
        a. Ignorant and scandalous should be barred (BCO 58-2)
        b. Those who do not confess (and non-communicants) should not come
        c. Should be member of evangelical church or approved by session
           (BCO 58-4)
              i. Does this mean on the rolls?
             ii. Or simply that one has a credible profession of faith?
                 (visible church)
        d. Should have special invitation to communicants to remain during
           service (58-4)
        e. Corinthians passage seems to refer to the group, not just
           individuals; doing it in a manner (separating believers!).  It
           should not be done casually!
   3. Set apart by prayer and thanksgiving
   4. Reading words of institution
   5. Distribute the elements



